---
title: data manipulation pandas
date: 2020-11-27
---

## Data selection and manipulation
### ```loc``` and ```iloc```
The most useful was is to loc by callable to select rows/columns. As long as the callable returns a list of true/false, it works.
### ```df.reindex``` returns data when index and/or columns presents but returns NaN or custom fillin when not present.
```python
s = pd.Series([1,2,3])
s.reindex([1,2,3]) #this returns [2,3,NaN]
```
### use ```index.intersection(other_df.index)``` to find common columns with other df
### use ```iat```/```at``` for selecting and setting
### ```isin``` takes both list and dict as arguments to specify columns for df
### ```where``` and ```mask```. ```mask``` is the inverse selection of ```where```
```python
df.where(df>5, '?') # return value if > 5, otherwise fill with '?'. fill with NaN if second argument not given
```
### ```query```
1. ```df[(df['a'] < df['b']) & (df['b'] < df['c'])]``` is same as ```df.query('(a < b) & (b < c)')```
2. ```df.query('index < 2')``` selects data from row 3. 'index' is a special name
3. ```df.query('a in b')``` same as ```df.loc[df.a.isin(df.b),:]```. ```df.quer('a not in b')``` is also valid
4. ***use case of ```query```***. when operations are the same but datasets are different
```python
expr = '0.0 <= a <= c <= 0.5'
map(lambda frame: frame.query(expr), [df, df2])
```
### ```lookup``` query by a pair of rows and columns list. return a list of these values. raise error when one of the labels not found.
## Data transformation
### Table transpose
of course we are not talking about normal mx transpose....
#### ```pivot``` vs ```melt```
1. ```pivot``` transforms data in different columns into one volumns of label and one column of value. ```melt``` is the reverse operation of ```pivot```
2. ```pivot_table``` allows us to have a aggregate function when there are multiple values of that label.
#### ```unstack``` vs ```stack```. which level of index can be selected
```stack``` is a special case of ```pivot```, put column names not in column but into another level of index, forming Multi-index table.  
```unstack``` otherwise, is the reverse of ```stack``` puting one level of index into column name

### group by mapping
```groupby({'a': 1, 'b': 2, 'c': 1})``` so that 'a' and 'c' are considered as the same group
### Iterate through groups to have some  operations...
### ```groupby().aggregate()```
1. apply different oeprations on all columns. ```groupby().aggregate([np.mean, 'min', max])
2. apply different operation on different columns by mapping. ```groupby().aggregate({'col1': func1, 'col2: func2})
### ```groupby().transform()```
must return a same dimensioned data as the original 
### ```groupby().apply()```
1. axis argument indicates how function goes forward. At each step, the function applies to the other axis.
2. apply method can return 'aggregate' like or 'transform' like results. It automatically interprets the results but we can also specify the format in result_type arguent
### ```groupby().filtering()```
```python
def func():
    return boolean #this has to be a boolean value
groupby().filter(func)
```
### slicing data
#### for multi-index
1. selection  
    1.1. normal/simple selection
    ```python
    # df is 3x3 and multi indexed with 3 levels in index and column
    df.loc[(slice(None),['a', 'b'],), (,,,)]
    ```

    1.2. pd.IndexSlice for loc like selection. can use range and no more slice()
    ```python
    idx = pd.IndexSlice()
    df.loc[idx['a':'c', :, :], idx[:,:,:]]
    ```
2.


## Multi-index
axis means both column and index are possible
### DF methods to set;reset/drop/rename axis.
1. set;reset  
    1.1. reindex(length of axis and data can differ. if axis longer, add nan value, otherwise truncate data like ```loc```)  
    1.2. set_index <-> reset_index(consumes a column)  
    1.3. set_axis: length of axis must be same as data dimension  
2. rename  
3. droplevel  
### index manipulation
#### Series has the most of the methods like axis. If axis needs manipulation, firstly extract the axis, then transform and finally set them as new axis.
1. to_flat_index; transform axis to list of tuples
2. to_frame; transform axis to dataframe
3. reorder_levels
